Advantages:

-fast speed

-leads u in right direction

-helps improve mapping skills

-makes navagation easier

-has panic buttons built in

-you can be found easier if in danger or in accident

-plugs into your car cigeratte lighter

Disadvantages:

-cellular devices can track other cellular device users

- not very cheap

-people focus on GPS more than road = accidents

-should be used as backup map but used as 1st resource

-needs good care and handling

-external power

-needs batteries (handheld ones)

If anyone has found more information please add on!!!!!!



There are many advantages of having a gps system:

1. A gps system comes with a "panic" button. When this button is pressed an operator at the gps carrier can listen in on the conversation and either help you out or alert the authorities. This will keep you safe in case of accidents or hi jacks.

2. Your car will never loose your car at a football match or mall. The gps service will track the car for you and send its lights flashing.

3. If your vehicle is ever stolen the gps system will track the vehicle and the authorities will be able to get it back in no time.
Ads by Google

4. A gps system in a car, boat, plane or haversack will ensure that you are never lost.

5. A gps system streamlines supply chains and truck movements. The system can track goods at any point of time and accurately predict when goods will reach their destination.

6. Gps systems are used to detect structural problems in buildings and roads and to predict disasters like earthquakes and so on. The scientific applications of a gps system are many.

7. A gps system can be used to locate a lost child, pet or family. The device is quite small and is like a watch or button on a collar.

8. A gps is a great exercise monitor and will help you keep track of your spped and so on.





    Advantage: Ease of Navigation

        A GPS device is extremely handy. When you are hiking, you can deviate from a path without worrying about how you will find your way back. When you are driving, GPS-based navigation systems can provide you with turn-by-turn directions, a helpful feature in a strange town.
    Advantage: Search Nearby Area

        Some GPS systems allow you to search the local area for nearby amenities, such as hotels, restaurants and gas stations. This is extremely helpful in some situations. For example, if you are driving cross-country and realize there is a problem with your car, you can search for nearby auto mechanics and select one that is along your route. Your GPS system will show you exactly how to get there.

        Sponsored Links
            Car Navigation

            Connect w/ International Suppliers to Source Your Products from China.
            www.GlobalMarket.com
    Advantage: Water Navigation

        GPS devices are perfect for water navigation. Since there are no landmarks in large bodies of water, boaters in the past had to use a compass and a map to determine if they were on the right heading, with somewhat imprecise results. But the advent of GPS systems allowed boaters to figure out their exact position on the map. In situations where underwater hazards are a problem, GPS devices allow boaters to steer around hidden dangers.
    Disadvantage: Possible Failures

        You need to carry a backup map and directions in case your GPS fails for some reason. For example, if you are driving down a city street, the buildings may block the satellite signal, preventing you from receiving position updates. If you are hiking in the wilderness, your handheld GPS receiver's battery may die, leaving you with no way to navigate. For hiking situations, it's a good idea to bring along a compass as well.
    Disadvantage: Inaccuracy

        GPS signals are not completely accurate. Obstacles like buildings and trees can deflect the signal, causing your position on the GPS screen to be off by as much as 100 feet. Atmospheric conditions (such as geomagnetic storms caused by solar activity) may also affect GPS accuracy. For highway driving, this can cause you to miss a turn or exit.

Sponsored Links

    Garmap Maps for Garminwww.Garmap.Co.Za

    Southern Africa, East Africa and Nigeria Maps 2009. Available Now!
    GPS Tracker + Softwarewww.bofan.cc/GPS-Tracking-Software

    Want to Build Tracking Service? Easy & Save 50% GPRS Cost.
    ARGUS Autonomous Chartingargus.survice.com

    Providing current conditions for your local waters.
    IFCA Project Cost Mgtwww.ifca.co.za

    Budget & Cost Mgt, Project Schedules & Collaboration

Related Searches:

    Tracking GPS
    GPS Satellite Tracking
    GPS Auto
    Golf GPS
    Car GPS

References

    U.S. Coast Guard: GPS Frequently Asked Questions
    Maps GPS Info: GPS Accuracy


