
LNA  -    A  hi-Q  tuned input circuit and dual-gate MOSFET provide for a sufficiently low noise figure for this application.
                       The galactic background is very noisy at low VHF , therefore it was felt the use of a GaAsFET device input stage  would
                       bring no practical advantages.  The MOSFET output is impedance matched via a small balun into a 3-stage filter to
                       improve front-end selectivity to the second stage MMIC booster amp.  The overall B/width is ~ 0.5MHz.
The field box also contains one each single stage MMIC booster amp. to compensate for cable losses .
                      
                       LNA schematic                            LNA pic(less shield)                     LNA pic                    
RF input & phase switch module -

Each LNA feeds into the respective RF inputs of this module.  LNA d.c. power (10V) is fed into the coax.cables (bias-T).
A further stage of RF amplification is added, which incorporates individual gain controls. This is used to set the gain of each
channel to result in the desired detector output level, in this case here usually ~ 100mVdc.
The output of the two RF stages are combined in the phase switch stage. In normal operation the upper transformer is doing
the in-phase / anti- phase switching. The squ.wave drive signal is delivered from the back-end , but each individual LNA can
be selected (full power) for adjustments & testing via the 3-pos. selector switch.  The bottom channel (west) has identical
components fitted to preserve symmetry and allow operation via selector switch, but doesn't get phase switched.
Outputs from both sections get combined via the 33 Ohm resistors to the common 48MHz output to the mixer stage.

RF input & phase switch module schematic
Mixer / Oscillator & I.F.filter module -

A  2-stage filter precedes the BF988 converter stage, with a 26MHz trap circuit rejecting possible image signals from the
AM CB band.  The oscillator operates on 37.3MHz (nominal) to convert the 48MHz signals to the 10.7MHz I.F. output.
The oscillator can also be varicap tuned +/- 400kHz , although this results in the band edges exceeding the LNA B/Width.
The 10.7MHz I.F. is L/C  filtered , then passes thru a wide ceramic filter and I.F. pre-amp (BF199).
The final 10.7MHz filter has 3 different bandwidths selectable, 280kHz, 55kHz and 15kHz.   There is probably no great need
for this refinement , but it was interesting to compare operation at each different B/width.  It is worth noting that even when
using 15kHz , one could still get quite acceptable recordings !

Mixer/Osc. & I.F.filter module schematic
Main  I.F.amp / detector / audio monitor & power supply module -

This module contains the 10.7MHz I.F.gain block with detector stage.  It was implemented with discrete components, but
could have been done with a single high gain IC stage . All transistors in the amp. are BF199.
The audio monitor takes its signal from an aux. output from the back-end module.
The power supply is straightforward, all voltages are derived from the 18 + 18V transformer secondary.
Most d.c. power is supplied on the +10V rail ,which is needed by two of the modules and the LNAs.
The back-end op-amps require  + / - 12V supplies , there is a separate +12V rail for the audio monitor, CMOS logic and
some control parts in the modules.  The +4.5V rail is used fir the RF amp. gain controls.

Main I.F.amp / Det. / audio mon. & PSU

Back - end -

Signal voltage from the detector stage is at first buffered and passed to an a.c.amplifier,and is also indicated on a
panel meter to show 0 - 300mV detector volts.  The O/put of the a.c.amp is fed to a small audio transformer ,its output
feeds  in-phase & anti-phase voltages to the synchronous detector (4066). This CMOS switch is driven by the same
square wave driver which operates the phase switch in the RF section.  The complete phase switch driver is shown at
                      the lower left section in the schematic  (4093/4027/741 ICs)
The phase detector output is then combined in a differential amp (TL081) which also has a detector balance control.
This balance needs to be set and remain reliably stable, therefore the control is a 10-turn prec.pot.
Another op-amp is used to indicate the amplified phase balance. This has to be an analog meter due to the rapidly
fluctuating nature of the noise.
The combined output is then integrated and d.c. amplified before sent out to an ADC, in this case SkyPipe.
Typ.settings here are :  detector stage 100mV,  a.c.gain  x20, d.c.gain x 100..
The detector level has to be set when there is min. galactic background noise, because when the galactic centre passes                              through the "beam" the level will increase to ~ 250...300mV ,even with a minimalistic antenna like this one !!